Functions are arguably one of the most important concepts in the entirety of JavaScript.
You'll use them literally everywhere, and the one of the core building blocks of JavaScript,
but learning functions can be quite difficult, especially if you're just getting started with JavaScript.
So in this video, I'm going to break down exactly how functions work, what they can do,
the different ways you can use them, and why you would even want to use them in the first place.
Also, this entire video is based on a similar video that I have in my JavaScript simplified course.
This course is perfect if you're a beginner JavaScript developer because it takes you from knowing
absolutely nothing about JavaScript all the way up to being an intermediate JavaScript developer
with things like testing, security, and clean code. I highly recommend checking out this course
is going to link down in the description for you.
Welcome back to WebDevSimplified. My name's Kyle, and my job is to simplify the web for you,
so you can start building our dream project center, and today we're going to be talking about functions.
So let's say I have some code that just console logs out the text high,
and then I have a bunch of other code somewhere in the middle, and then finally somewhere else
I'm console logging out high again. You can see my code works fine. It says hi says hi again,
and all the code in the middle is running and just fine if I had some code there to run.
What happens if I want to change this console log high to say hello?
Well, I need to change it to hello here. Okay, now I need to change it to hello down here.
So I had to change my code in two different places. Essentially, I know for fact that this
console log that says hello, and this one on the bottom, are always going to be exactly the same,
and I want them to do the exact same thing every single time I call them.
But right now, they're copied between different places. Every time I change one,
I need to make sure I update the other one. This is the perfect use case for a function,
because a function in JavaScript all it does is it takes some type of logic,
so console logging, hello, too, and it just puts that inside of a particular piece of code
that you can run whenever you want, and it's always going to do the same thing every single time.
So let me show you really quickly how you would create a function to do this a little bit of a log.
So to create a function, you just need to type the keyword function, and you'll know you'll
done this correctly. If in your editor, it'll probably turn a different color in my example,
it turns blue, but it could be any color for your particular editor. Then you need to give your
function a name, so just hit space, give it a name. We'll call this one say hi.
Now, the final step you need to do is you need to close this off with parentheses,
so you put it open and a closing parentheses, and then finally some open and closing curly braces.
So what we have here again is we have the keyword function, we have a name for our function,
and then functions can actually take arguments and parameters inside of them, so you can like
pass code to a function. In our case, we're not dealing with that, and that's why our parentheses
here are completely blank, and for now that's perfectly okay. Then the final thing we have is these
open and closing curly braces. Everything between these curly braces is going to be the code
that gets executed in your function. So everything we put inside here, all of this gets executed
every time we call our say hi function. The one we're doing here is machine a console log. Hi.
And if I save my code, you notice nothing gets printed on the right hand side of my screen,
but we also have no errors at all. So this code is working, but is not doing anything. And that's
because by default, when you create a function, which is what we've done here, the function just
stores some code to execute later. It doesn't do anything, it doesn't run any code, it's just saying,
hey, I have this function called say hi, and when you call it, I'm going to run all the code
inside these curly brackets, but for now I'm not going to do anything and tell you tell me to do
something. So let's talk about how we actually call a function. To call a function, all you do is you
type out the name of the function, in our case say hi, and then you again use parentheses.
So open and close the parentheses, that's how you tell your function you want to call it.
So we're saying call the say hi function and pass absolutely nothing to it, because we didn't put
anything inside of our parentheses here. Now if I run this, you can see it prints out hi, because
what's happening is it creates our function right here, then later in our code, we're calling
that function, and when you call the function, it just goes into these curly brackets and runs
all the code inside of them, and that's all that happens. If we run this function a second time,
you'll see it prints out hi twice. Now by changes to hello, I only have to change it in one
place and updates both of the functions that are being called. That's again one of the huge
benefit for functions, because you can take logic and code that you're using all over the place,
put it in one place, and then you can reuse it and change it easily all in one place.
Now up until this point, all we've done is create a very basic function that doesn't take any
arguments and just does whatever we tell it to. We can, if we want, make this have multiple lines.
So this could say hello and bye, and now you can see when we call this, it's going to say hello,
and then it's going to say bye. So you can have as many lines of codes you want in here as
long as they're between these curly braces. What happens if you want to pass code to a function?
Let's in our case, try to create a sum function. So we're going to say the function,
and we're going to call it sum. We're going to do those opening and closing parentheses and
opening and closing curly brackets, but I want to pass some code to our sum function. All you
need to do is just give it a name, whatever you want. If you call it anything you want,
in our case, we'll call it a and we'll call it b. Because we want to add the numbers a and b together.
When you pass different variables inside of a function like this, you just need to separate
them by a comma. That's all it takes. You don't even need this space. I just put it for
readability purposes. And now we're passing in a variable called a and a variable called b.
And I just want to log out adding those two variables together. So I'm just going to log out
whatever a plus b is. And you'll notice before I added a plus b, these were kind of a dark gray
color in my editor. I want to add a plus b. They become a more bright color. That's just my editor
telling me that before I wasn't using these variables and now I am using these variables. So now
to call this function, we just type sum and we put the opening and closing brackets here,
opening and closing parentheses, but now we also need to pass it to value. So it's passed
to the values one and two, again separated by a comma. If I save, you can see it logged out
three because it's just adding one and two, which is what I pass into here. So when you have
parameters and arguments inside of a function that you can pass between them, you'll notice
that whatever the first thing you pass to the function is is just defined as this first variable
here. So that is a. You can see if I console dot log a. And I save this, you can see it prints out one.
If I change this to console log b, you can see it prints out two because whatever your second value
is here corresponds to the second value here. So they directly map to each other one to one
into wherever they're going. So whatever you put here gets put into this variable, whatever you put
here gets put into this variable b here. It's almost exactly the same thing as if you just said
like const a equals one, const b equals two. And then you copy whatever code is inside this function
and paste it down below. That's the exact same thing that happens when we run some one and two.
So let's get rid of all that code, bring it back to what we had here. Now what happens though
if we don't pass a variable for b. So I'm just going to console log a and b. So you can see it prints
out one and two. But what happens if I don't pass anything for our second value? If I save,
you notice it prints out undefined and it doesn't actually throw any errors. Javascript is
that unique when it comes to functions and that it doesn't throw any errors if you don't pass
enough arguments. It just sets all the arguments you don't pass to undefined. So if I pass
nothing, you'll notice both a and b are set to undefined because it didn't pass anything at all for them.
So anytime you leave off, it's some variables that you're trying to pass to your function.
It'll always just set them to undefined. So it's really important to understand.
Now the final thing I want to talk about with functions is how you actually get data out of a
function. Because up until this point, all we've been doing is logging out some information to the screen
but we haven't been returning any data to be used. So instead of just logging out a plus b,
I want to return a plus b so I can use it later. And to do that, you'll use the return keyword.
So just type in the return keyword. If you've done it correctly, it'll turn a color in your editor
and then you just pass whatever you want to return. So I could just say here some equals a plus b.
And then I can return our sum down here and that's going to work just fine. Or I can have
what I had before. We're just in line a plus b. So now whatever a plus b is is going to be
returned from my function. So again, let's pass in one and two. And when we say if you notice
nothing's logged out, which is great, but our sum is being printed out here. So we have our actual
sum value, which is right here. We'll just call it value. You get a little bit easier to read.
And I can console that log, our value, and now you'll notice it prints out three. So when you use
the return keyword, what essentially happens is it takes whatever that value is your returning
and it puts it inside the variable of that function. So it just comes out of the function.
This is really powerful on one of the main use cases for a function is getting some other
data from that function. It's going to do a bunch of stuff and then spit out some data for you.
So all the time you're going to see code like this where you set a value based on the result
of the specific function. Another interesting thing about this return keyword is it makes
sure no code runs after it. So we just say console.log never will run. And we say you'll notice this
never gets printed out. It's even kind of great out inside of my editor. And that's because
every single time whenever you run return the function immediately exits out nothing else afterwards
is ever going to be run. This is actually really useful and people will use this to exit out of
functions early if there's like an error of some form. Now something really neat that you may have
actually picked up on this video is that console.log is actually a function on its own.
We just change this back here to high. You'll notice that this works just like a normal function.
We're calling this log function with our parentheses and we're passing it a specific value.
And console.log is really cool because that's what it is. It's just a function that takes
in some values. And there's lots of functions built into JavaScript that you've probably already
used before. But this is probably the one you've used the most and you may not have even
realized that this itself is a specific function. So that's why it's really important in JavaScript
to make sure you understand the fundamentals of what it's going on because if you do, it makes
all these magical seeming things like console.log much simpler to understand because it really
is just a function that's all it is. So if you're interested in actually learning those building
blocks of JavaScript and making sure you understand the core concepts so that you can really
truly understand JavaScript. I highly recommend my JavaScript simplified course.
It's going to be linked in the description in this video and it takes you from knowing absolutely
nothing about JavaScript all the way to being an intermediate developer with skills far past
what I knew when I landed my first dev job. So with that said, thank you very much for watching
and have a good day.
